---
title:  "CMU MSCS"
date:   2021-09-09 21:29:23 +0800
categories: Note common
---


See in this [website](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/academics/graduate-admissions#chart)
## Basic Info
[Super useful FAQ](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/academics/**faq**)



## Basic Requirements

### GRE
Graduate Record Examination (GRE) scores are highly recommended. If you cannot provide them, please briefly explain in your application. GRE scores are waived for applicants who have graduated from, or are enrolled at, Carnegie Mellon University.


### TOFEL
If you are an international applicant and your native language (language spoken from birth) is not English, an official copy of an English proficiency score report is required. The English proficiency requirement cannot be waived for any reason. We strongly encourage applicants to take either the TOEFL or IELTS.

### Transcript

A PDF of your most recent transcript from each college and/or university you attended, even if no degree was granted.


### Resume

Your resume in PDF format.

### Statement of Purpose

Your Statement of Purpose — a concise one- or two-page essay describing your primary research interests, related experiences and objective in pursuing a Masters in computer science.

### Recommendation Letter

Three letters of recommendation, at least two of which are from faculty or recent employers.

## Timeline
* Application opens September 7, 2021
* Application Deadline is December 9, 2021 (11:59 a.m. EST)
* Our programs make their decisions at various times during February and March.
## Application Fee
The application fee is \$125 for one program and \$75 for each additional program.


For more on the application process, please refer to the SCS Online Graduate Application Instructions.

